.. Sphinx-Gallery documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Mon Nov 17 16:01:26 2014.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Welcome to Sphinx-Gallery's documentation!
==========================================

A `Sphinx <http://sphinx-doc.org/>`_ extension that builds an HTML
gallery of examples from any set of Python scripts.

It is extracted from the scikit-learn project and aims to be an
independent general purpose extension.

The code of the project is on Github: `Sphinx-Gallery <https://github.com/sphinx-gallery/sphinx-gallery>`_

Why Sphinx-Gallery?
-------------------

* Simple examples that run out of the box are the best way to learn a
  library
* Pleasing, organized, visual layouts
* Links, searching, backlinks throughout examples and documentation


What does it look like?
-----------------------

Here is an example gallery generated from a few Python scripts.

.. include:: gen_modules/backreferences/numpy.sin.examples
.. raw:: html

        <div style='clear:both'></div>

Here we put only the examples of our gallery that use a specific
function. This display granularity ready to use within your
documentation, not just the gigantic galleries with all the examples
together.

Go ahead, click on those thumbnails to go to the examples. Beautifully
rendered HTML versions of the original python scripts with, narrating
prose from the doctrings and inline comments and plots generated by
the scripts.

Features
--------

* Runs Python files and captures outputs + figures. Learn how to
  :ref:`set_up_your_project`
* :ref:`multiple_galleries_config` no number limit.
* Automatically hyperlink the code in the gallery to the
  corresponding function documentation. :ref:`link_to_documentation`
* Automatically links from documented functions to examples using the
  function. :ref:`references_to_examples`
* :ref:`notebook_examples`: turn your scripts into a full narrative
  with the :ref:`notebook_examples_syntax`


Sphinx-Gallery Show: :ref:`examples-index`
------------------------------------------

Contents:
=========

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   getting_started
   advanced_configuration
   faq
   syntax
   utils
   reference
   auto_examples/index
   tutorials/index
   auto_mayavi_examples/index
   changes
   Fork sphinx-gallery on Github <https://github.com/sphinx-gallery/sphinx-gallery>


Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
